I got a message from a longtime viewer
and support on patreon raising the issue
of the practical impossibility of being
a hundred percent vegan with reference
to the use of bone char in sugar so I
know as vegans we do like to give
vegetarians a hard time in terms of the
distinction that vegetarians make
implicitly or explicitly but many
vegetarians explicitly do discuss this
terms of their rationalization for
consuming milk and cheese but not
consuming you know the flesh of cows the
distinction the vegetarians make between
a product and a by-product now if you're
vegan you probably regard that as a lazy
moral excuse in that you would think if
you buy milk you are still supporting
the dairy industry if in fact you buy
leather you're still supporting the
dairy industry because the production of
milk and the production of leather are
in fact two separate stages of one in
the same industry when you buy milk
you're paying for real and when you buy
veal you're paying for milk they're not
really separable in terms of the cycle
of production and we may say the cycle
of suffering and the cycle of both
ecological damage and exploitation of
animals that's involved now that haven't
been said there are limits to this
practically in the life of a vegan so
this person writes to me and says I
watched a video from a channel called
vegan in Japan about Japanese candy and
why Japanese candy is not vegan because
the refined cane sugar they use has been
processed with bone char in Japan so
this is an issue I have been aware of
for a very long time I think most of you
are aware of it maybe some of you are
surprised but this is not really this is
not the addition of animal bone to sugar
but it is using animal bone in the
filtration in the refinement of the
sugar so there are imperiled of this
there are some there are some methods
used in making beer that likewise filter
out some of the impurities from beer by
using a gelatin-like substance called
isinglass so I believe when you were
eating the sugar you are not eating the
bone char or you're not eating
significant quantity of it maybe there's
a trace amount there but you are paying
for the company to buy animal bones and
those are a byproduct to the production
of meat and to use animal bones in the
production of refined white sugar now to
be clear not all sugar has this problem
if you're in a western country the
easiest way is to choose a turbinado
sugar as its cold I think I'm brands
like red so we're not a word that's a
magical vocabulary but there are some
forms of brown sugar and you'll notice
they don't quite have the same
glistening appearance and those do not
rely on the use of bone char to produce
them and they're often they're not even
marketed as vegan there's simply more
than one way to refine sugar and they
don't all involve the use of bone char
however if you're buying something like
a chocolate bar you have no way of
knowing whether or not the sugar used to
make that choco bar is vegan depending
on where you're living in the world big
industries will use whatever the
cheapest form of sugar is so you can do
some research as to whether or not
generally the candy industry or the
chocolate bar industry or the breakfast
cereal industry whether they are
generally using non vegan sugar or if
they're using Pikachu but that will
change from place to place I mean like
within the United States Ness it's a big
country it's possible that in some
states the cheapest available form of
sugar happens to be vegan but in many
many places it's not in many plates this
is an industry standard way to to refine
sugar and it may be the cheapest form
available but generally when they want
to make sugar that has this kind of
bright you know what reflects light in a
pleasing way those varieties of sugar
tend to be refined using bone char and
those are animal bones by prior to the
meat industry so she comments in Japan
the United States and Canada most of the
sugar being used in processed foods does
have bone char I'm apparently she says
in some parts of Europe it's the
opposite again this is my impression
generally but you have to check wherever
you're living it can vary from place to
place she says we are going to Japan on
the fifth of November oh okay that's
coming up in just a few days fifth of
November 2016 okay have a nice trip um I
realized that avoiding point bone char
sugar would be not being able to eat any
processed food such as
candy but again anything like anything
containing sugar she gives the example
of rice crackers me Rin but even soup
most soup has sugar in it so you know
and there's no way to find out whether a
product is made with beet sugar or cane
sugar it's even more complicated than
that whether or not it happens to be
vegan because it's the the processing
method used so she has come to the
conclusion that avoiding sugar is taking
Venus I'm a step too far beyond its
definitions this is in reference to the
original definition of veganism being
that you do everything that is
practicable not practical practicable in
English those are two slightly different
words slightly different meanings so she
says I talked about it with my boyfriend
and he had come to the same conclusion
so I wonder how the so-called junk food
vegans can exist in the u.s. if all
cookies snacks and soft drinks are
produced with this non vegan sugar so
it's try again it varies but yeah the
vast majority my impression is the vast
majority United States are produced with
not vegan sugar well and she may or may
not know it but some of the raw vegans
and some of the vegans who oppose all
processed food or all cooked food they
do invoke this kind of concept they do
draw attention to the fact that in
general the the sugar in refining
process food of any kind is not going to
be vegan and there are some people who
choose to be raw vegan or to refuse to
buy anything that's in a box whether
they refuse to eat a chocolate bar they
refused to breakfast cereal or anything
like that so recently her boyfriend also
found that the alcohol free beer he
enjoyed was not a hundred percent vegan
not because of any of the ingredients
but because the glue used to fix the
label to the bottle was not completely
vegan so non vegan glue is a problem in
the packaging of many allegedly vegan
products because the glue used for the
bottle or the box may not be really
vegan and then beyond that she says the
glue used in allegedly vegan shoes may
not be vegan correct so I knew about
that for 490 years now I've known about
that for quite some time that it is a
problem that you can be using but even
when you look into mainstream shoes and
even specialized vegan shoes
actually the glue that's used to keep
the different layers of the soul affixed
to one another that is very often a
non-vegan glue so the interesting thing
that this is not how she phrases it in
her email to me the most interesting
intellectually stimulating thing here is
that in some ways vegans actually
indulge in some of the same distinctions
of convenience that vegetarians engage
in vegans due to some extent make a
distinction between what is a product
and what is merely a byproduct because
we have to you know we have to live in
the modern world we have to be able to
buy shoes that do not have leather
butter nevertheless not be so she says
do you think about the glue when you
find a pair of shoes in your size do you
think about the glue that's used to a
fixed attack or a label to juice
cucumbers etc etc she says I don't even
think it's good to promote avoiding
sugar and glue as vegans because this
might just discourage people from being
vegan entirely it's already enough of a
challenge obviously for many people to
live without wool silk beeswax and other
hidden ingredients you know like
l-cysteine and there are many many
hidden ingredients right and she also
says I wonder if boycotting refined
sugar can bring any change the sugar
industry right so I mean it breaks down
to a look I mean to me there are sort of
three things to say about this one when
you actually buy sugar in a bag when you
buy sugar as an ingredient to use
yourself if you're baking bread yourself
that's when you can make the choice
that's when you can make the decision to
use a vegan sugar as opposed to not
making sure that's when you have the
power and the option as a as a consumer
and there but there are many many
contacts when as a consumer you do not
have the option and that is why to come
back to something you may have heard
before in this channel we have to get
organized and we have to get involved in
a political lobbying obviously things
would change if we had a law passed in
any country if we had a law passed that
was addressed to actually labeling
products about what type of sugar was
used in their manufacture then you could
have the beginnings of consumer choice
to distinguish between you know the same
way that some people want to label
genetically modified versus non je
clarified so that consumers have a
choice if you start to label it you're
the beginning of something you could
also tax them differently you could have
a very mild you know one percent tax to
encourage industry to be using the non
bone char sugars and as I understand it
the in most products if you're not
actually making something like a horrid
candy where the appearance of the sugar
matters they can use vegan sugar and get
results that are just as good now no no
maybe I'm wrong maybe somebody's a real
expert on making candy is going to
explain to me that there are other
subtle differences but to my knowledge
almost all food when it's not the
problem the appearance of the food using
vegan sugar does not have any
disadvantage and it's only a few foods
that would really matter for so we need
labeling we need taxation and without
laws from the top down without lobbying
for hierarchical change we're never
going to get those changes there are
some changes we cannot agitate for
simply as disaggregated isolated
individuals and this is one example
another example you might not care about
because you probably don't smoke
cigarettes the difference from vegan and
non vegan cigarettes that's also
something where you need to have
labeling and maybe taxation and other
policies interview but the the third
thing I've already mentioned things
interesting is that we like to think
that veganism is in a completely
separate category from vegetarianism
because we refuse to play the game of
saying well this is a product and this
is a byproduct and that products matter
ethically whereas byproducts do not but
when we get into some of these difficult
gray areas actually vegans are forced to
make some of the same compromises that
vegetarians make because the end of the
day we have to wear shoes and we have to
buy products with labels and we can't
choose you know the glue that's used for
the label and it's possible even the
company making that product can't choose
I don't know I've never looked into that
when I was working in the book
publishing industry I looked into the
chemistry of the glues used for binding
books who the devil is in the details
that's scary you know
and traditionally even the glue that's
used to a fixed wallpaper to the wall
had animal products and an animal fat
animal skin basically so you know we
make the choices that we can make as
individuals but then we get organized so
that we can press forward with the
choices that we can't make as mirror
individuals